§ 98 King Ramadhipati's edict on Dhammavinaya

Then King Ramadhipati convened all the monks together and entreated them to enter into the following covenant, "O venerable lords, from this day forward, should anyone come before you wishing to receive the lower ordination who is a branded criminal, or a thief, or an escaped convict, or an opponent of the king; or is old and infirm, or afflicted with disease, or is missing a hand or other limbs, or is stooped, or short, or lame, or bent over; or in lieu of these [defects], is a destroyer of assemblies;  such a one, who inspires not faith but the censure of those who see him, such a person is  not to be made a novice. Should anyone come before you wishing to receive the higher ordination, both we and the fraternity chiefs dwelling in the city of Hanthawaddi are to be informed. Should you, venerable lords, [119] without first informing us, confer the higher ordination [upon anyone] at your own locality, we shall bring punishment upon the mother, the father, and the relatives of the ordinand, as well as upon your own lay donors.

"There are some wicked monks who practice medicine, astrology and numerology. Some make their living through carpentry or ivory carving, while others tend and look after the children of royal ministers. Still others make their living by forecasting calamities, or by reading signs and dreams. Some monks go to cotton fields and preach sermons with long intonations; and taking the cotton, chilies and rice they receive in donation, trade these goods and make their living. Some monks use and accept gold, silver, rubies and gems, while others raise cattle and cultivate paddy fields, silted riverbanks and islands, and so make their living.

"Some monks inappropriately mingle with gamblers, drunkards, people who make their livelihood from thievery, men in the service of the king, or other men and women. Should any such wicked monks, O venerable lords, come to you and wish to dwell [at your monasteries], refuse them permission. There are some monks who are filled with faith, who practice well according to the rule, who exert themselves in thestudy of Scripture and commentary. Should any such monks come to you and wish to dwell [at your monasteries], grant them permission.

"Should men approach you wishing to receive lower ordination, first teach them the writing of letters. Then, having made them practice till they can read and recite by  heart, teach them the Refuges, and the rules which novices must know. [120] Only then ordain them as novices. Upon reaching twenty years of age, should novices wish to receive higher ordination, they should be taught a summary of the four virtues to be observed by monks, together with the Bhikkhupatimokkha and the Khuddasikkha from beginning to end. When they have been made to practice till they can recite the confessional, both we and the fraternity chiefs dwelling in the city of Hanthawaddi are to be informed. Thereupon we shall [provide the candidates] with the eight requisites and request you to confer on them the higher ordination.

"Venerable lords, do you also strive to practice in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Vinaya. Formerly, in the country of Ramanna, monks were divided [into different factions], whence arose in the Sasana such dangerous thorns of corruption [as enumerated above]. But now, venerable lords, all of you in faith have taken ordination in the lineage descending from the residents of the Mahavihara. Do you, therefore, conform yourselves to the tonsure and wearing of robes followed by the great elders of Sihala [Island] and live as a single united [fraternity]."

Having in this manner entreated all monks in Ramanna country to agree to this covenant, King Ramadhipati dispatched a message to those who kept gold and silver, who stored up property, and who owned elephants, horses, buffaloes, cows, and male and female slaves, "Being full in faith, strive to practice in accordance with the rule and give up your gold, silver, and other properties. If you cannot so practice, return to lay life." 

Then, some monks filled with faith gave up their gold, silver, and other properties, and practiced well in accordance with the rule, while some others, unable togive up [their property], returned to lay life. Monks who were obviously guilty of grave offenses were not so entreated. [to return to lay life] but were ordered unfrocked. [Likewise], monks who committed grave offenses whose guilt was not obvious, but who, in the face of much censure and blame could not easily be purified, were also not so entreated, but were ordered unfrocked. [Beyond this], monks who practiced medicine, monks who practiced astrology and numerology, monks who earned their livelihood by painting—like laymen addicted to sensual pleasure and wealth, and monks who engaged in commerce; [all these monks] were ordered unfrocked.

In this way King Ramadhipati purified the Sasana of corruption in Ramanna country and unified all of its monks in a single fraternity. [And for three years], until the year 841 Sakkaraj,217 village dwelling monks and forest dwelling monks continuously received the genuine and pure Sihala ordination handed down through the lineage, descending from the residents of the Mahavihara. By that time, one thousand, three hundred and forty 218 fraternity chiefs had been ordained, along with fourteen thousand, two hundred and sixty-five junior monks, for a total of fifteen thousand, six hundred and five 219 monks of both classes.

After that, in fulfillment of the covenant he had made, [the king] supplied the eight requisites to sixty-one novices who were twenty years of age, requesting that they be given higher ordination in the Kalyani- Sima. At that time, in the country of Ramanna, there were a total of fifteen thousand, six hundred and sixty-six monks.

Thus, by causing the rules of discipline laid down by the Blessed One to be respected and practiced [within] a single unbroken lineage descended from the residents of the Mahavihara, King Ramadhipati Dhammazedi purified, protected and looked after the noble Sasana throughout his reign for twenty-nine years. He was forty-six when he ascended the palace, and he died at the age of seventy-five in the year 2035 of the Sasana, or 853 Sakkaraj. After King Ramadhipati purified theSasana, the fraternity of monks descended from the residents of the Mahavihara that he established in Ramanna remained undivided for one hundred and twenty years. 


